Once around the the ocean worlds of the
Saturnian
system, the Cassini mission, shown here
in this artist's impression, went to
Saturn, but it wasn't the first probe to
do so. We had the Voyager probes pass by
earlier. They revealed some fascinating
detail about some of the worlds, but the
Cassini mission really made all the
difference.
So let's have a look at these moons of
Saturn, which is what we're talking
about. Titan, first of all, discovered
by Christian Huygens back in
1655, so bright that really you can see
it very easily, even with a small
telescope or a pair of binoculars, as a
little point of light that always seems
to be just so far away from Saturn, a
few planet diameters, and orbits round
in a period of around about a
month. It's a big moon. It's
5,150 kilometers in diameter. That makes
it larger than the planet Mercury. And
at one stage, we thought this was the
largest moon in the solar system. But
that title is now taken by Ganymede
because when we look at Titan, what we
are seeing is the cloud tops, the top of
its very smoggy atmosphere rather than
the rocky planet like object underneath.
And so if you take the the diameter to
be the rocky bit, Ganymede beats it by a
very small amount.
So when we look at it with a telescope,
then no matter how much we zoom in, all
we see is this bland, smoggy yellow
cloud
layer. It's made of about 150% of the
density of the Earth's
atmosphere, mostly nitrogen. It's got
traces of methane and other organic
compounds in there. And it's those
organics that are making up that smog.
Cold minus 180° C. After all, it's about
1 billion miles from the sun, so it
doesn't get a lot of heat, but the
atmosphere does warm the planet up some.
Uh there is a small greenhouse effect
caused by the sun's rays percolating
down through to the surface and uh the
the infrared radiation unable to escape
back out but so cold on the surface that
all of the water is frozen up hard as
iron. And in fact much of the rock
surface that you think you're looking at
is in fact ice. There is a tremendous
amount of water on
Titan. Now, the Cassini mission was able
to carry out a number of flybys and it
took an special infrared camera with it
so it could see through that smog layer
down further into the atmosphere and in
some regions down to the surface. And so
we have this uh planet-like world here
that looks suspiciously like the Earth
in many ways. We have the clouds in the
atmosphere. You can see through and see
uh two types of terrain lower down that
look like almost land and sea, but uh
well there are lakes and there are
rivers and there are mountains
underneath those clouds as we shall see.
Another shot here in black and white of
some clouds high in the titanium
atmosphere and the spots at the top
there nearer the pole those are in fact
lakes and we shall see more about the
lakes in a
moment. Another shot of some clouds
taken showing the weather changing on
Titan. So here there are some bubbly
clouds in the left hand picture over the
top of some lakes and then a little bit
later they've moved further north uh
blowing around in the titanian
atmosphere with the winds there. But
where the clouds part and we are able to
see down to the surface we see all these
features of lakes and
rivers running in channels. You can see
a nice round sort of kidney bean-shaped
lake in the top right picture there and
at the bottom all those river channels
with that uh forking
dendritic appearance so that the
channels are meandering downhill carving
away getting bigger and then flowing
downhill. Um and what's flowing in them
is not water cuz it's too cold. It's
liquid natural gas. It's methane and
ethane mixed together probably with
other materials dissolved in them. And
when those rivers terminate, they flow
out into the lakes. And this is the
Kraken Mar as it's called on Titan here.
You can see all around the edge of the
dark region where river channels are
running down into the lake there.
Now the main point of this photograph is
the inset area shown with that white
square around it. That's a promonry from
the land area reaching out into the
lake. And the images on the left show
how that changed from date to date. So
from July 2013 to August of 2014 and
then onwards into 2015, the shape of
those fingers of land changed.
But it wasn't the land changing. It was
the level of the lake. This was the
seasons on Titan seeing more or less of
the liquid flowing into the lake which
was then gradually evaporating back up
into the atmosphere in the very very
similar manner to the way that the water
cycle on Earth sees rain run down
channels flow into seas and lakes and
then evaporate back into the atmosphere.
So an incredibly earthlike world but in
the deep freeze. And also in the deep
freeze of the volcanoes we see volcanoes
on Titan but they are ice volcanoes
so-called cryo volcanoes low temperature
volcanoes. And very much it is the case
that if methane and ethane are
performing the functions that water
performs in our geological cycles, then
it is uh water performing the functions
of rock here on
Titan. Around its equator, there is a
major ridge which has been detected and
this is ice. This is a major ridge of
ice. running around the central part of
Titan. And that is essentially a sort of
planetwide mountain range of ice
mountains. Quite incredible. Now, back
in 2004 when the Cassini mission first
arrived at Saturn, it had a passenger.
It had the Huygens's probe from the
European Space Agency hitching a ride
with it and that was then dropped and
was able to navigate to Titan and then
parachute down through Titan's
atmosphere and take some amazing
photographs on the way down. And I love
this one. We've got a mountain ridge in
the center with different arms of the
mountain reaching outwards. And then in
the valley to the left of the mountain,
you can see river channels carved into
the ground in the valley. It's a little
bit of a fisheye lens effect going on
here. Um the probe was falling and
spinning and uh taking wide-angle
pictures, so stitching them together
created this slightly strange look.
And then the probe made it to the ground
and it took this
photograph. It's landed on either a
beach or a dried up riverbed. And the
river would have been again methane and
ethane running along. And all of the
pebbles that you see here are very
rounded. They're probably made of ice
substituting for rock and have been
rounded by the erosion forces of being
washed downstream when this river was
flowing. So perhaps we landed at the
wrong
season. So Titan is amazing. A lot of
water there but cycles based on other
chemicals. Fascinating to think
whether even biological processes could
somehow make use of a different solvent,
not water, but liquid natural gas and
perhaps be able to form living
creatures. And there is a new mission
heading out to Titan called the
Dragonfly mission. And that will take a
quadricopter, a drone with it that will
be able to fly around the surface and we
should learn an awful lot more about
this fascinating
world. But Titan gets all the press. The
other moons of Saturn are incredibly
interesting as well. This is Ria,
smaller. It's the second in line after
Titan. Only 1,500 kilometers, around
about 1,000 miles in diameter. Got a few
craters all over the surface there. Um,
second largest moon of Saturn, ninth
largest moon in the solar system, so
still fairly substantial. Has a thin
atmosphere around it, oxygen and carbon
dioxide. And again a chilly minus 174°
centigrade measured on the surface
there. Now the fancy uh thing about Ria
is that it has moons uh sorry not moons
rings. It has rings around it. These
were detected by Ria passing in front of
a star and the starlight dipped three
times on either side of Ria indicating
three separate rings of material. So not
only does Saturn have rings, but its
moon Ria does as well. And in fact,
around the edge of the planet, the light
curve dipped very irregularly, either
showing that those rings are going in
further towards the surface of the
planet or that there was an atmosphere
with clouds in. Um, and we're not quite
sure what that was really telling us. If
you compare the trace for Ria there with
what happened when another of Saturn's
moons, Tus passed in front of a star,
there was a much cleaner eclipse. The
light just dropped and came back again
without really any fuss while the uh
moon was moving in front of the star.
So, no rings and certainly less of that
ragged behavior at the edges.
Another thing that's been known about
Ria for some time is that it's uh
orbiting around Saturn tidily locked
just like our moon does with us. It
always keeps one face pointing towards
Saturn. And as a result of that, as it
goes around its orbit, there is a
leading face and a trailing face. And
the leading face is white and frosty.
It's probably picking up ring particles
as it goes around. And then the trailing
edge seems to be dirty and browner in
color. And we think that's folins,
organic material that's accumulated on
the surface.
We also see ice cliffs where the uh
coating of Ria which is probably an ice
crust has cracked and revealing that
there is an liquid water ocean probably
kept warm by radioactivity or tidal
effects of interactions with the other
moons interior to
Ria and that's absolutely fascinating
because again this is means it's and lot
of ice and possibly even some liquid
water at a warmer temperature. Um, and
that's one of those environments that
would be very interesting from the point
of view of potential habitat for some
form of life. So that's
Ria Dioni, the third moon of Saturn is
very very similar. It's a little bit
smaller, 1100 kilometers, ranks 15 in
the solar system in terms of the size of
moons and again seems to exhibit all
those signs of an internal liquid water
ocean buried underneath 100 kilometers
of ice. When we look at rear, it is also
tidily locked with one face covered in
white frosted material and the other
face the trailing edge covered in uh
fewer craters but um with ice cliffs and
all those dirty organic folins. The top
picture is the surface of Ria unrolled
onto a rectangle and the lower picture a
side on view of the uh fascinating
little world with a few craters and
those ice cliffs and the brown tholins.
Now I've mentioned tholins a few times.
Pholins is a sort of loose grouping of
molecules made of rings and chains of
carbon and nitrogen with hydrogen
attached all around in all sorts of
different combinations.
And the shapes and nature of some of
these are not dissimilar to what you get
in the nucleotide bases of DNA. the A T
C G of DNA and the U of
RNA. These are typically double rings
with some
nitrogens in one of the rings or
attached to it. And so uh we are seeing
that these moons in the outer solar
system and indeed many other bodies have
these complex organic molecules all over
the surface. So, if this is not a recipe
for brewing up interesting chemistry,
um, then I don't know what
is. And then the other star of the show
really revealed to us by Cassini was
Enceladus. This is the picture that I
just love of Enceladus. It shows what's
called the tiger stripes. Now, the tiger
stripes are not orange with black, but
white with blue. So, I don't quite know
why they called them that, but this is
an ice covering all over the southern
hemisphere of Enceladus here with these
blue cracks down through the ice. And
here's a full globe view showing that
that is what's going on on the southern
hemisphere. On the northern hemisphere,
things are a bit different. No tiger
stripes, but some craters.
And Cassini discovered that in backlit
views of Enceladus, those tiger stripes
are venting plumes of material into
space. And the probe was then able to
fly back round, fly through the plume
and make detections of the composition
of the plumes, finding water and even
organic molecules and molecular
hydrogen. So what we think is that there
is a rocky core with an ice crust and at
least over the southern half of
Enceladus there is a liquid water ocean
trapped under the ice kept warm by tidal
effects perhaps a little bit of
radioactive heating as well. Um, and
those jets of water that are crack
coming up through the cracks in the ice
are venting to space carrying organic
material and that molecular hydrogen.
And that is very interesting because
it's not a chemical
equilibrium. And if there is one
surefire sign of life, it is that it is
out of chemical equilibrium. That
molecular hydrogen points to being a
waste product of some biological
activity going on perhaps down at the
rock water interface underneath all that
ice on little old Enceladus there. So
not only are Titan and Enzeladus
interesting but the other moons as well
and they don't get very much press the
uh nature of Ria and Dioni particularly
as being water containing ice worlds is
just astonishing. So thanks very much
for listening and I hope you enjoy this
and the other videos in the series.